---
layout: post
date: 2012-10-25
title: "Grub2 and ISO boot"
tags: [grub2, bootloader, linux, kernel, iso, image]
author: Alexandru Juncu
---

Note: This article focuses on Debian based Linux distributions.

**Grub2** is the next generation Linux bootloader that is trying to
replace the "Legacy" Grub version. It is a complete rewrite of Grub 1
and only lately becoming fully featured compared to the old version and
even comes with some new interesting features.

The old Grub's configuration was rather straightforward, everything
being done in a configuration file in the _grub_ directory of the
_/boot_ partition (it's a common practice to have _/boot_ mounted on a
separate filesystem). In Debian it was usually _/boot/grub/menu.lst_ and
in Red Hat _/boot/grub/grub.conf_ (sometimes one being a symlink to the
other).

The configuration file for Grub2 is _/boog/grub/grub.cfg_. But the file
itself should never be modified (not even root has write access).
Instead, this file is generated by commands like __update-grub2__. It is
generated based on other configuration files like (in Debian)
_/etc/default/grub_, which has things like global configurations,
timers and default settings.

The menu entries for the operating systems themselves are generated
based on files in the _/etc/grub.d/_ directory (in Debian). An
interesting feature of Grub2 is the fact that these files are actually
Bash scripts. OS entries don't need to be hard coded, but can be
scripted. One such script is the _10_linux_ file that detects any new
kernel image in the _/boot_ directory and writes a new entry for it
without having to manually add it. Manual entries can also be written in
these files (usually in the _40_custom_ script file).

An interesting new feature in Grub2 is the possibility to boot from an
ISO file. A LiveCD can be stored in an iso file on disk and loaded by
grub without having to burn it onto CD or having to boot the normal
system first. A menu entry for ISO booting would look like this:

	menuentry "Ubuntu LiveCD" {
	loopback loop (hd0,1)/boot/iso/ubuntu-12.04-desktop-i386.iso
	linux (loop)/casper/vmlinuz boot=casper :iso-scan/filename=/boot/iso/ubuntu-12.04-desktop-i386.iso noprompt noeject
	initrd (loop)/casper/initrd.lz
	}

Based on the previous ideas, here's a way to configure grub to make an
entry for every .iso file that you have in a specified directory. First,
create a directory to store the .iso files (ex. _/boot/iso/_) and move
your Live CDs there.

Next, make a script in the _/etc/grub.d/_ directory. Let's call it
_42_iso_ (the number in front dictates the order in which the scripts
are executed).

	#!/bin/bash

	ISO_DIR="/boot/iso/"

	for iso in $(ls $ISO_DIR*.iso); do
		echo "menuentry \"$iso\" {"
		echo "set isofile=\"$iso\""
		echo "loopback loop (hd0,1)\$isofile"
		echo "linux (loop)/casper/vmlinuz boot=casper iso-scan/filename=\$isofile noprompt noeject"
		echo "initrd (loop)/casper/initrd.lz"
		echo "}"

	done

Don't forget to give it executable access. Then run the __update-grub2__
command to generate the Grub2 configuration file.

	chmod +x /etc/grub.d/42_iso
	update-grub2


Thanks to doraz for suggesting ISO booting with Grub.
